README.md, before:

# Breaking Changes: release 0.4.0 is a BREAKING release, before updating to this release DECRYPT your already encrypted data with the EXACT version used for encrypting. Then update and encrypt again
[![Breaking Changes](https://img.shields.io/badge/WARNING-BREAKING%20CHANGES-red)](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt) The breaking change 0.4.0 was necessary as the chaining of hash/kdf was not properly handled which potentially lead to less-secure-than-possible encryption passwords. Still strong ones but not as strong as they could be according to hash/kdf config
# Secure File Encryption Tool
A powerful tool for securely encrypting, decrypting, and shredding files with military-grade cryptography and multi-layer password hashing.
## History
The project is historically named `openssl-encrypt` because it once was a python script wrapper around openssl. But that did not work anymore with recent python versions.
Therefore I decided to do a complete rewrite in pure python also using modern cipher and hashes. So the projectname is a "homage" to the root of all :-)

**Important note**: although `whirlpool` is supported by this tool, I do not recommend using this hashing algorithm. That is because building `whirlpool` via pip fails on recent Python versions (>= Python 3.12). If you want to use it you should have a look at [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) which allows multiple Python versions to exist in peaceful co-existence. `whirlpool` will remain in the code also in future versions of this application \
## Issues
you can create issues by [sending mail](mailto:issue+world-openssl-encrypt-2-issue-+gitlab@rm-rf.ch) to the linked address

## Features
- **Strong Encryption**: Uses Fernet symmetric encryption (AES-128-CBC) as default with secure key derivation. Also supports `AES-GCM`, `AES-SIV`, `CAMLELIA` and `POLY1305-CHACHA20` as ecnryption algorithm
- **Multi-hash Password Protection**: Optional layered hashing with SHA-256, SHA-512, SHA3-256, SHA3-512 and Whirlpool they all can be chained with different rounds to create key-stretching
- **Multi-KDF Password Protection**: Optional layered KFD with PBKDF2, Scrypt, Argon2 and Ballon they all can be chained with different rounds to create key-stretching and very strong brute-force prevention
- **Password Management**: Password confirmation to prevent typos, random password generation, and standalone password generator
- **File Integrity Verification**: Built-in hash verification to detect corrupted or tampered files
- **Secure File Shredding**: Military-grade secure deletion with multi-pass overwriting
- **Directory Support**: Recursive processing of directories
- **Memory-Secure Processing**: Protection against memory-based attacks and data leakage
- **Glob Pattern Support**: Batch operations using wildcard patterns
- **Safe Overwriting**: Secure in-place file replacement with atomic operations
- **Progress Visualization**: Real-time progress bars for lengthy operations
- **Graphical User Interface**: User-friendly GUI for all operations (beta)
- **Built-in and custom Templates**: built in templates like `--quick` `--standard` and `--paranoid` can be used. You can also define your own customized templates in `/templates`
## Files Included
- [crypt.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/crypt.py) - Main command-line utility
- [crypt_gui.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/crypt_gui.py) - Graphical user interface
- [modules/crypt.cli.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/crypt.cli.py) - command-line interface
- [modules/crypt_core.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/crypt_core.py) - provides the core functionality
- [modules/crypt_utils.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/crypt_utils.py) - provides utility functions
- [modules/secure_memory.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/secure_memory.py) - provides functions for secure memory handling
- [requirements.txt](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/requirements.txt) - Required Python packages
- [README.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/README.md) - This documentation file
- [docs/install.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/install.md) - installation notes
- [docs/usage.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/usage.md) - usage notes
- [docs/examples.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/examples.md) - some examples
- [docs/password-handling.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/password-handling.md) - notes about password handling
- [docs/security-notes.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/security-notes.md) - notes about security
- [unittests/unittests.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/unittests/unittests.py) - Unit tests for the utility
- [unittests/test_gui.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/unittests/test_gui.py) - simple test for `tkinter`
- [unittests/testfiles](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/unittests/testfiles) - testfiles for `unittests` encryption

all testfile files are ecrypted with password `1234` for your testing
## License

[MIT License](LICENSE)

Commit message:

Update README.md and crypt_cli.py
- Update breaking changes notice in README.md from 0.4.0 to 0.5.0
- Adjust scrypt rounds in template config from 10000 to 1000 for better performance

README.md, after:

# Breaking Changes: release 0.5.0 is a BREAKING release, before updating to this release DECRYPT your already encrypted data with the EXACT version used for encrypting. Then update and encrypt again
[![Breaking Changes](https://img.shields.io/badge/WARNING-BREAKING%20CHANGES-red)](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt) The breaking change 0.5.0 was introduced because many changes were required to better handle security
# Secure File Encryption Tool
A powerful tool for securely encrypting, decrypting, and shredding files with military-grade cryptography and multi-layer password hashing.
## History
The project is historically named `openssl-encrypt` because it once was a python script wrapper around openssl. But that did not work anymore with recent python versions.
Therefore I decided to do a complete rewrite in pure python also using modern cipher and hashes. So the projectname is a "homage" to the root of all :-)

**Important note**: although `whirlpool` is supported by this tool, I do not recommend using this hashing algorithm. That is because building `whirlpool` via pip fails on recent Python versions (>= Python 3.12). If you want to use it you should have a look at [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) which allows multiple Python versions to exist in peaceful co-existence. `whirlpool` will remain in the code also in future versions of this application \
## Issues
you can create issues by [sending mail](mailto:issue+world-openssl-encrypt-2-issue-+gitlab@rm-rf.ch) to the linked address

## Features
- **Strong Encryption**: Uses Fernet symmetric encryption (AES-128-CBC) as default with secure key derivation. Also supports `AES-GCM`, `AES-SIV`, `CAMLELIA` and `POLY1305-CHACHA20` as ecnryption algorithm
- **Multi-hash Password Protection**: Optional layered hashing with SHA-256, SHA-512, SHA3-256, SHA3-512 and Whirlpool they all can be chained with different rounds to create key-stretching
- **Multi-KDF Password Protection**: Optional layered KFD with PBKDF2, Scrypt, Argon2 and Ballon they all can be chained with different rounds to create key-stretching and very strong brute-force prevention
- **Password Management**: Password confirmation to prevent typos, random password generation, and standalone password generator
- **File Integrity Verification**: Built-in hash verification to detect corrupted or tampered files
- **Secure File Shredding**: Military-grade secure deletion with multi-pass overwriting
- **Directory Support**: Recursive processing of directories
- **Memory-Secure Processing**: Protection against memory-based attacks and data leakage
- **Glob Pattern Support**: Batch operations using wildcard patterns
- **Safe Overwriting**: Secure in-place file replacement with atomic operations
- **Progress Visualization**: Real-time progress bars for lengthy operations
- **Graphical User Interface**: User-friendly GUI for all operations (beta)
- **Built-in and custom Templates**: built in templates like `--quick` `--standard` and `--paranoid` can be used. You can also define your own customized templates in `/templates`
## Files Included
- [crypt.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/crypt.py) - Main command-line utility
- [crypt_gui.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/crypt_gui.py) - Graphical user interface
- [modules/crypt.cli.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/crypt.cli.py) - command-line interface
- [modules/crypt_core.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/crypt_core.py) - provides the core functionality
- [modules/crypt_utils.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/crypt_utils.py) - provides utility functions
- [modules/secure_memory.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/modules/secure_memory.py) - provides functions for secure memory handling
- [requirements.txt](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/requirements.txt) - Required Python packages
- [README.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/README.md) - This documentation file
- [docs/install.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/install.md) - installation notes
- [docs/usage.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/usage.md) - usage notes
- [docs/examples.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/examples.md) - some examples
- [docs/password-handling.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/password-handling.md) - notes about password handling
- [docs/security-notes.md](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/docs/security-notes.md) - notes about security
- [unittests/unittests.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/unittests/unittests.py) - Unit tests for the utility
- [unittests/test_gui.py](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/unittests/test_gui.py) - simple test for `tkinter`
- [unittests/testfiles](https://gitlab.rm-rf.ch/world/openssl_encrypt/-/tree/main/openssl_encrypt/unittests/testfiles) - testfiles for `unittests` encryption

all testfile files are ecrypted with password `1234` for your testing
## License

[MIT License](LICENSE)
