openssl_encrypt/docs/DEPENDENCY_MANAGEMENT.md, before:

# Dependency Management Guide

This document outlines the dependency management strategy for the openssl_encrypt project. It explains how dependencies are tracked, updated, and maintained throughout the project lifecycle.

## Dependency Structure

The project uses a structured approach to dependency management:

1. **Source `.in` Files**:
   - `requirements-prod.in`: Contains production dependencies with version constraints
   - `requirements-dev.in`: Contains development dependencies, includes production dependencies

2. **Lock `.txt` Files**:
   - `requirements-prod.txt`: Precisely pinned production dependencies
   - `requirements-dev.txt`: Precisely pinned development dependencies

3. **Build Configuration**:
   - `pyproject.toml`: Contains build dependencies
   - `setup.py`: Contains installation dependencies

## Using the Lock Files

### For Development

To install all development dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

### For Production

To install only production dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements-prod.txt
```

## Updating Dependencies

We use pip-tools to manage dependencies efficiently. A script is provided to simplify the update process:

```bash
# Run the update script
scripts/update_dependencies.sh
```

You can also manually update dependencies:

1. Edit the `.in` files with new dependency constraints
2. Generate updated lock files:
   ```bash
   pip-compile requirements-prod.in --output-file=requirements-prod.txt
   pip-compile requirements-dev.in --output-file=requirements-dev.txt
   ```
3. Sync your environment:
   ```bash
   pip-sync requirements-dev.txt
   ```

## Version Pinning Strategy

### In Source Files (`.in`)

- **Security-critical dependencies**: Use both lower and upper bounds
  - Example: `cryptography>=44.0.1,<45.0.0`
  
- **Regular dependencies**: Use compatible release specification
  - Example: `bcrypt~=4.3.0` (allows 4.3.*)

- **Development tools**: Use minimum version with upper bounds
  - Example: `pytest>=8.0.0,<9.0.0`

### In Lock Files (`.txt`)

All dependencies are pinned to exact versions to ensure reproducibility.

## Dependency Update Workflow

1. **Regular Schedule**:
   - Security-critical dependencies: Check weekly
   - All dependencies: Update monthly

2. **Vulnerability Alerts**:
   - Address critical vulnerabilities immediately
   - Test thoroughly before merging

3. **Update Process**:
   - Run `scripts/update_dependencies.sh`
   - Verify tests pass with new dependencies
   - Commit updated lock files
   - Document significant changes in `CHANGELOG.md`

4. **Breaking Changes**:
   - Document in pull request
   - Update code to accommodate breaking API changes
   - Include comprehensive tests

## Using Dependency Files with CI/CD

In your CI/CD pipeline, use the lock files to ensure consistent builds:

```yaml
# Example CI config snippet
steps:
  - name: Install dependencies
    run: pip install -r requirements-prod.txt  # For production builds
    # OR
    run: pip install -r requirements-dev.txt   # For development builds including tests
```

## Security Considerations

- Lock files prevent unexpected dependency changes
- Regular updates ensure security patches are applied
- Pinned major/minor versions prevent breaking changes
- The security scanning pipeline will validate dependencies against known vulnerabilities

Commit message:

docs: Create version pinning policy
- Add VERSION_PINNING_POLICY.md with comprehensive guidelines
- Define specific approaches for different dependency types
- Document when to use each version specifier
- Update related documentation files
- Mark Phase 2.2 as completed in the dependency security plan

This completes Phase 2.2 (Create Version Pinning Policy) of the dependency security plan,
providing clear guidelines for managing dependency versions.

openssl_encrypt/docs/DEPENDENCY_MANAGEMENT.md, after:

# Dependency Management Guide

This document outlines the dependency management strategy for the openssl_encrypt project. It explains how dependencies are tracked, updated, and maintained throughout the project lifecycle.

## Dependency Structure

The project uses a structured approach to dependency management:

1. **Source `.in` Files**:
   - `requirements-prod.in`: Contains production dependencies with version constraints
   - `requirements-dev.in`: Contains development dependencies, includes production dependencies

2. **Lock `.txt` Files**:
   - `requirements-prod.txt`: Precisely pinned production dependencies
   - `requirements-dev.txt`: Precisely pinned development dependencies

3. **Build Configuration**:
   - `pyproject.toml`: Contains build dependencies
   - `setup.py`: Contains installation dependencies

## Using the Lock Files

### For Development

To install all development dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

### For Production

To install only production dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements-prod.txt
```

## Updating Dependencies

We use pip-tools to manage dependencies efficiently. A script is provided to simplify the update process:

```bash
# Run the update script
scripts/update_dependencies.sh
```

You can also manually update dependencies:

1. Edit the `.in` files with new dependency constraints
2. Generate updated lock files:
   ```bash
   pip-compile requirements-prod.in --output-file=requirements-prod.txt
   pip-compile requirements-dev.in --output-file=requirements-dev.txt
   ```
3. Sync your environment:
   ```bash
   pip-sync requirements-dev.txt
   ```

## Version Pinning Strategy

We follow a comprehensive version pinning policy that categorizes dependencies based on their security impact and usage. For detailed guidelines, see [VERSION_PINNING_POLICY.md](./VERSION_PINNING_POLICY.md).

### In Source Files (`.in`)

- **Security-critical dependencies**: Use both lower and upper bounds
  - Example: `cryptography>=44.0.1,<45.0.0`
  
- **Regular dependencies**: Use compatible release specification
  - Example: `bcrypt~=4.3.0` (allows 4.3.*)

- **Development tools**: Use minimum version with upper bounds
  - Example: `pytest>=8.0.0,<9.0.0`

### In Lock Files (`.txt`)

All dependencies are pinned to exact versions to ensure reproducibility.

## Dependency Update Workflow

1. **Regular Schedule**:
   - Security-critical dependencies: Check weekly
   - All dependencies: Update monthly

2. **Vulnerability Alerts**:
   - Address critical vulnerabilities immediately
   - Test thoroughly before merging

3. **Update Process**:
   - Run `scripts/update_dependencies.sh`
   - Verify tests pass with new dependencies
   - Commit updated lock files
   - Document significant changes in `CHANGELOG.md`

4. **Breaking Changes**:
   - Document in pull request
   - Update code to accommodate breaking API changes
   - Include comprehensive tests

## Using Dependency Files with CI/CD

In your CI/CD pipeline, use the lock files to ensure consistent builds:

```yaml
# Example CI config snippet
steps:
  - name: Install dependencies
    run: pip install -r requirements-prod.txt  # For production builds
    # OR
    run: pip install -r requirements-dev.txt   # For development builds including tests
```

## Security Considerations

- Lock files prevent unexpected dependency changes
- Regular updates ensure security patches are applied
- Pinned major/minor versions prevent breaking changes
- The security scanning pipeline will validate dependencies against known vulnerabilities
